## [SDF10] API Learning Reflection 🧠

Welcome to the [SDF10] API Learning Reflection! Through this exercise, you will reflect on key concepts, practical experiences, and the tools you've encountered or used in API interactions.

1. **Understanding and Application**: Reflecting on the key concepts, can you explain in your own words what an API is and its significance in software development? Provide an example of how you have used or encountered an API in a project or a practical scenario.

An API is a way for different kinds of software applications or services to interact with each other, in the world of software development, they - or I supposed I can say we now - would call it a set of rules and protocols for communication between applications. It allows them interchange data and do different kinds of actions, but without them understanding the behind the scenes work or code that is being used by each other. The way I understand APIs is that it can allow one application such as the KFC App where we order food off of, to interact with either a server or another application that has the data for these menu items and it is not stored locally on the app itself otherwise the data would be too much. This allows the app to function seamlessly by integrating with another app and/or server, or it also could be a third party service where the data is being stored, and the API allows the KFC App to GET this data from the server. It also allows the KFC App to send data to the stores by using an API (cannot disclose the name of the API due to legal reasons) and integrates these orders to the store in order to process. To sum it up, it is a way for these apps to communicate with each other, without the hassle of trying to convert data to the same format - for them to do all kinds of things, depending on what the purpose of the API is for.

2. **Conceptual Distinctions**: How would you differentiate between an interface and an API? 

An interface is a set of rules that defines how systems and components should interact with each other, meaning that an interface is the law between the components and systems that interact with each other. Computers and other machines have their own way of communicating in the background, we do not know what it is doing behind the scenes. The interface allows us to interact with these machines without understanding the behind the scenes - for example a console controllers' buttons all have specfic functions, the X button is normally to jump, the R2 button is normally to shoot and the triangle button is to swap weapons, depending on the development of the game and setup of the consoles' interface. The interface is the interaction between the user to the controller and from the controller to the console, this is the rules that define how the controller should function when playing a game on the console. This is also communication in a single system. Whereas, an API is a set of rules and protocols between interaction and communication between seperate entities and systems, where cross-play comes in. If a user is gaming online on an Xbox and wants to play with a friend that is using a Playstation, an API would come in to allow these two seperate servers, consoles and people play together using an API for these different servers to communicate with each other, without being the same kind of console. 

3. **Components and Types of APIs**: Can you identify the main components of an API and describe their roles? Reflect on the different types of APIs mentioned (e.g., Web APIs, RESTful APIs) and discuss which type you find most intriguing or useful, and why.

The main components are as follows:

- Endpoints: This refers to the specific path where different API functions can be accessed, the normal structure would be http://theapi.com/terminals/ids/69420. The domain here is theapi.com where the API is hosted, and the path is terminals/ids/69420 describing the exact id that we are looking for in the path.
- Methods: These are the HTTP methods the define the action that can be run against the API's endpoints - referring to RESTful APIs. There is a GET request to get data, POST request to send data, PUT request to update data, and the DELETE request to remove data. 
- Data Formats: This is the format(s) data is exchanged between clients and servers to ensure that it is accessible on both ends and that it can be understood in terms of data. There is the JSON format which is the lightweight data-interchange format where it is also easy for us espcially for me to read and understand as there are mainly key - value pairs that can be interpreted with the eyes. Then there is the XML format, which is a markup language and older than JSON, however it deifnes the rules for encoding documents in a format that humans can also read as well as machines. XML is oftenly used in web services. 

Different types of APIs:

- Web APIs: Called web services, as it is used for the web, are interfaces that operate over the net and facilitates the interactions between devices and the web servers hosting them. An example for a web API would be the version control system I am currently using, which is github, where it has its own API for us to share and push data using the different types of HTTP methods.
- RESTful APIs: Is an architectural style for designing web services. One of its key characteristics is statelessness, where this means that data is not cached nor stored, the requests have to specify excatly what is needed and what is meant to be pushed. This allows for more efficient use of web services as it is much faster and more effective.
- Private APIs: These are APIs that are privately used in organisations which is either built in-house or the license for the API has been bought by the organisation. It is more of a secretive API where only whoever has the rights to access it can access it but needs an API key or authentication to verify that they have the access to it.
- Public APIs: Known as open APIs, can be accessed by the public with minimal restrictions. An example would be spotifys' beautiful API which does a lot and opens a lot of doors for application development using it's API.
- SOAP APIs: A protocol called SOAP is used to exchange structured data when web services are implemented. With SOAP APIs, clients and servers can communicate via messages based on XML. Typically, they communicate via HTTP or other protocols and specify operations and data types using Web Services Description Language (WSDL).

I find private APIs intriguing and useful as no one else besides those who are granted access have access to it, and it also has a very special and dedicated functionality to it, designed for its specific purpose of making the company money, but also to definitely carry out very crucial tasks to make the integration between the software extremely easy and seamless with limited bugs and errors (if used and developed correctly).

4. **Practical Application and Tools**: Reflect on your experience with API exploration and implementation. Have you used any specific tools (such as Curl or API exploration tools) or libraries to interact with APIs? 

I have utilized cURL, a command-line utility for transmitting data using URLs, in my investigation into APIs. For testing various endpoints, examining responses, and sending HTTP requests to API endpoints, cURL has proven to be really helpful. I've been able to quickly play with API capabilities and learn how various endpoints operate because to its simplicity and versatility. Although I am far from comfortable using cURL, I find it quite powerful in what it does and would like to learn more about it as well as be able to use it without worries. The API I used with cURL was Spotifies open API where I have done GET requests to get different types of songs and album details.

5. **Learning and Improvement**: Considering the key concepts and your practical experiences, identify one area related to APIs where you feel confident and one area where you see a need for improvement. What steps will you take to enhance your understanding and skills in the area you wish to improve?

I would not necessarily say that I am confident in this specific API, however I do feel that I know more than just the intro to it, which is Database APIs, as I have worked with an API which I did not know was an API at the time, to get data, update data and so forth, for e commerce websites in my current role, using SQL. It was a learning curve and I am still not confident enough to say I have mastered it which will take a lot of time a practice, but eventually I will get there. 

One area where I see improvement needed, is the different types of tools in APIs, there are quite a few and I have not used most of them, and they do seem daunting, however the steps I will take is to break them down step by step and tackle them one by one in order to understand them. I will try not to overthink it and take it step by step in order to make sure I understand it. It will take time such as everything else in life, however the importance is that I put in the effort to understand these different types of tools in testing and using APIs. 